MCP docs initial draft (#8168)
microsoft/vscode-docs: docs/copilot/mcp-servers.md

---
ContentId: 7c550054-4ade-4665-b368-215798c48673
DateApproved: 03/05/2025
MetaDescription: Learn how to configure and use Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers with GitHub Copilot in Visual Studio Code.
---

# Use MCP servers in Visual Studio Code (Preview)

Model Context Protocol (MCP) enhances GitHub Copilot's agent mode. It enables you to use any MCP server directly in your agentic coding workflow. This article guides you through setting up MCP servers and using tools with agent mode in Visual Studio Code.

## What is MCP?

When you enter a chat prompt to a language model with agent mode in VS Code, the model can invoke various tools to perform tasks like file operations, accessing databases, or calling APIs in response to your request. MCP (Model Context Protocol) provides a standardized way to connect these tools to the language model. Learn more about [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.info/).

> _MCP servers_ are services that provide one or more tools to _MCP hosts_ like VS Code. For example, a file system MCP server might provide tools for reading, writing, or searching files and directories. MCP servers can run locally on your machine or be hosted remotely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_MCP servers_ are services that provide one or more tools to _MCP clients_ like VS Code. For example, a file system MCP server might provide tools for reading, writing, or searching files and directories. MCP servers can run locally on your machine or be hosted remotely.
```

VS Code supports MCP servers, allowing you to add them to your workspace and use the tools they provide in agent mode.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > MCP server support is currently in preview and only available in [VS Code Insiders](https://code.visualstudio.com/insiders).

Reviewer: MCP will be available to all users, but agentic mode may not be

## Add an MCP server

To add an MCP server to your workspace, follow these steps:

1. Configure an MCP server in the `.vscode/mcp.json` file in your workspace to share configurations with project collaborators.

    Select the **Add Server** button to add a template for a new server. VS Code provides IntelliSense for the MCP server configuration file.

    The following example shows how to configure a Perplexity MCP server, where VS Code prompts you for the API key when the server starts. Learn more about the [Configuration format](#configuration-format).

    ```json
    // Example .vscode/mcp.json
    {
        // 💡 Inputs will be prompted on first server start,
        //    then stored securely by VS Code.
        "inputs": [
            {
                "type": "promptString",
                "id": "perplexity-key",

>                 "description": "Perplexity API Key"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "description": "Perplexity API Key",
                "password": true
```

            },
        ],
        // Note, not "mcpServers"
        "servers": {
            // https://github.com/ppl-ai/modelcontextprotocol/
            "Perplexity": {
                "type": "stdio",
                "command": "npx",
                "args": [
                    "-y",
                    "@modelcontextprotocol/server-perplexity-ask"
                ],
                "env": {
                    "PERPLEXITY_API_KEY": "${input:perplexity-key}"
                }
            }
        }
    }
    ```

> 1. Alternatively, specify the server in the `setting(mcp)` VS Code setting for a personalized MCP server list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Alternatively, specify the server in the `setting(mcp)` VS Code user setting to enable the MCP server across all workspaces.
```

>     Add the server configuration to your [user settings](/docs/getstarted/personalize-vscode.md#configure-settings) to share MCP server configurations across all your workspaces. This is useful for personal servers or when you want to use the same server configuration in multiple projects.

Reviewer: Seems like this is a bit redundant with the aboce

1. Enable auto-discovery of MCP servers in your workspace by setting the `setting(chat.mcp.discovery.enabled)` setting.

>     VS Code can automatically discover and reuse MCP servers that you have already defined in other tools, such as Claude Desktop and others.

Reviewer: The first line doesn't give users info about what "auto-discovery" is, we should lead with that.

1. Run the **MCP: List Servers** command from the Command Palette to view and manage the configured MCP servers.

## Configuration format

> Use the following JSON configuration format to define MCP servers.

Reviewer: Somewhere in here we should link to https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/reference/variables-reference, and the `inputs` section should link to the input variables section on the page https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/reference/variables-reference#_input-variables

- The `"servers": {}` field holds the list of MCP servers, and follows Claude Desktop's configuration format.

    Specify the server name as the key and provide the server configuration as the value. VS Code shows the server name in the MCP server list. Provide the following fields in the server configuration:

>     | Field | Description | Examples |

Reviewer: We should have separate tables for SSE versus stdio configs I think

    |-------|-------------|----------|
    | `type` | Server connection type. VS Code supports both `stdio` and `sse`.  | `"stdio"`, `"sse"` |
    | `command` | Command to start the server executable. | `"npx"`, `"python"`, `"docker"` |
    | `args` | Array of arguments passed to the command. | `["server.py", "--port", "3000"]` |
    | `env` | Environment variables for the server. | `{"API_KEY": "${input:api-key}"}` |

>     | `envFile` | Path to an `.env` file for storing placeholder values. | `".env"` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    | `envFile` | Path to an `.env` from which to load additional environment variables. | `"${workspaceFolder}/.env"` |
```

    ![MCP Tool Confirmation](images/copilot/mcp-tool-confirmation.png)

## Managing tools

Run the **MCP: List Servers** command from the Command Palette to view the list of configured MCP servers.

![MCP Server List](images/copilot/mcp-server-list.png)

When you select a server, you can start, stop, or restart the server. You can also view the server configuration and server logs to diagnose issues.

> [!TIP]
> When you open the `.vscode/mcp.json` file, VS Code shows commands to start, stop, or restart a server directly from the editor.

![MCP server configuration with lenses to manage server.](images/copilot/mcp-server-config.png)

### Command-line configuration

You can also use the VS Code command-line interface to add an MCP server to your user profile or to a workspace.

To add an MCP server to your user profile, use the `--add-mcp` command line option, and provide the JSON server configuration in the form `{\"name\":\"server-name\",\"command\":...}`.

```bash
code --add-mcp "{\"name\":\"my-server\",\"command\": \"uvx\",\"args\": [\"mcp-server-fetch\"]}"
```

> To add an MCP server to a workspace, in addition to the `--add-mcp` option, also specify the `--mcp-workspace` option and provide the folder or workspace in which to add the server.

Reviewer: `--mcp-workspace` is not there yet, we need some additional features from the configuration service

> 

Reviewer: We can also mention something like:

> VS Code also includes a URL handler that can be used to install an MCP server. To form the URL, construct an `obj` object in the same format as you would provide `--add-mcp` above, and then create the link using the following logic:
>
> ```ts
> const link = code:mcp/install?${encodeURIComponent(JSON.stringify(obj))
> ```
>
> This link can be used in a browser, or opened on the command line, for example via `xdg-open $LINK` on Linux.
